Title: Effects of Gua Sha therapy on thoracolumbar fascia thickness and clinical outcomes of patients with chronic nonspecific low back pain: A randomized controlled trial.

Journal: Medicine
Year: 2025
PMID: 40922243

Chronic nonspecific low back pain (CNSLBP) is associated with thoracolumbar fascia (TLF) dysfunction. However, the structural effects of Gua Sha, a Traditional Chinese Medicine technique, remain unclear. This study aimed to explore the acute and short-term effects of Gua Sha therapy on TLF thickness, pain intensity, and related physiological parameters in patients with CNSLBP. Thirty-two participants with CNSLBP were randomized to receive Gua Sha or hot pack therapy, a commonly used conservative treatment for low back pain, once a week for 4 weeks. The effects of the 2 treatments were compared. TLF thickness, pain, and related parameters were measured at baseline and immediately after the first and fourth interventions. A 2 (group) × 3 (time) repeated measures ANOVA was used for data analysis. With increasing intervention, both groups showed significant improvements in pain intensity and dysfunction (P < .001), significant reductions in tissue hardness and pressure pain threshold (P < .05), and significant increases in skin temperature and lumbar flexibility (P < .001). However, only the Gua Sha group significantly reduced TLF thickness immediately after the first intervention (MD = 0.388, 95% CI: 0.101-0.675; P = .01) and immediately after the fourth session (MD = 0.607, 95% CI: 0.199-1.015, P = .005). The heart rate variability-related indicators did not reach statistical significance (P > .05), but their trends were favorable. Gua Sha can effectively relieve pain, improve function, and regulate tissue mechanical properties in CNSLBP patients and its effects may be achieved through multiple pathways. Although the single and 4-session interventions were not significantly better than heat in improving fascial thickness, it performs better in pain and flexibility clinical outcomes, supporting its potential value as a complementary therapy. Future studies with larger samples and longer periods are needed to clarify its mechanism of action and optimize treatment options.