Title: Adverse Events in the MASH Randomized Controlled Trial With Detailed Reporting of Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders Events.

Journal: Physical therapy
Year: 2025
PMID: 41081735

Older adults and those with low back pain (LBP) are at increased risk of research-related adverse events (AEs); yet, Cochrane reviews show AE under-reporting in rehabilitation trials. To inform AE practices in future rehabilitation trials, details are provided on novel AE surveillance and reporting practices used in the Manual Therapy and Strengthening for the Hip (MASH) trial. The study design was a secondary analysis of a multisite, single-masked, randomized controlled trial comparing 2 exercise-inclusive interventions. The study was conducted at research-based physical therapist sites. Participants were older adults with moderate-intensity, chronic LBP with hip pain and muscle weakness. Participants were randomly assigned to receive 16 sessions of hip-focused or spine-focused physical therapy over 8 weeks. Active AE monitoring was facilitated with standardized interviews during each treatment session and at 8-week, 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-months. Common terminology criteria for AEs classification was used. AEs were adjudicated by a site investigator and reviewed at multisite meetings. AE classification, relatedness, expectedness, severity, timing, recurrence, duration, and intervention impact were evaluated between interventions. Among 184 participants, there were 243 AEs (n = 128 hip-focused group, n = 115 spine-focused group) in 112 participants; 38.3% were unexpected, with 47 occurring in the hip-focused and 46 in the spine-focused group. AE relatedness, expectedness, and severity were similar between groups. Of the 243 AEs, 157 were mild, 71 were moderate, and 15 were severe/life threatening. Most AEs (80.2%) occurred early and were classified as musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders (MSKCT), with shorter MSKCT AE duration in the hip-focused group. Within each group, 15 MSKCT AEs resulted in study modification. This analysis describes a framework to improve upon active AE surveillance during rehabilitation trials to better inform risk-to-benefit analyses. Data can also be used to inform clinical decision-making related to risks from MASH trial interventions.